---
title: Installing the Q# development environment for VS 2017
author: cgranade
uid: microsoft.quantum.install.vs-2017
ms.author: christopher.granade@microsoft.com
ms.date: 7/31/2018
ms.topic: article
---

# Installing the Quantum Development Kit for Visual Studio 2017 #

## Installing Visual Studio 2017 (Windows 10 only)

> [!NOTE]
> The Microsoft Quantum Development Kit does not support Visual Studio for Mac.
> To install on macOS, please follow the instructions for [using Visual Studio Code](xref:microsoft.quantum.install.vs-code).

If you do not have Visual Studio 2017 (15.8 or later) installed, you can download Visual Studio 2017 Community Edition for free.
To do so, please see the [Install Visual Studio 2017](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/install/install-visual-studio) page.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> When you are presented with the option to select the tools for specific workloads, check the box for **.NET Core cross-platform development**.
> If there are any other workloads you would like to install, you can select them as well.

Once you have installed Visual Studio 2017 (15.8 or later), download the [Microsoft Quantum Development Kit for Visual Studio](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=quantum.DevKit) extension from the Visual Studio Marketplace.
Double-click the VSIX once it is downloaded to install the extension.

## Optional Dependencies ##

Some of the samples demonstrate using the Quantum Development Kit with other programming environments, and have additional installation requirement:

- Some samples use the Node.js Package Manager (NPM) to handle user interface dependencies.
  NPM can be installed [manually](https://nodejs.org/en/download/current/) or through a [package manager](https://nodejs.org/en/download/package-manager/).
- The Python interoperability feature has been developed for the [Anaconda distribution](https://www.anaconda.com/download/) of Python 3.6.
  Please see the [README](https://github.com/Microsoft/Quantum/tree/master/Samples/PythonInterop/README.md) file provided with the Python sample for more details.

# Validating the Quantum Development Kit installation

In this section you will clone the quantum samples & libraries repository, and run a sample application to verify that your Q# environment is correctly installed and configured.

2. Clone and open the [Microsoft Quantum Developer Kit Samples and Libraries](https://github.com/microsoft/quantum) GitHub repository.
    1. Open Visual Studio.
    2. Open the **Connect** view in **Team Explorer** (`Team` > `Manage Connections`)
    3. Select **Clone** under **Local Git Repositories** and enter `https://github.com/Microsoft/Quantum.git`
    4. Click **Clone** to clone the repo.
    5. The repository will be cloned on your local computer and Visual Studio will switch to the **Solution Explorer** on the right populated with the libraries and samples.
    6. Open the `Samples\QsharpSamples.sln` solution.
      - If prompted by the **Install Missing Features** pane, click **Install** to allow the installation of the necessary features. This is most often F# and tools used by some of the samples.

3. Validate your Q# environment by running the teleport sample program:
   1. Find the `TeleportationSample` project in `Samples` > `0.Introduction` folder of `QsharpSamples` solution, right click on it, and then select "Set as Startup Project".
   2. Run the solution (F5.)

> [!Tip]
> If you receive a number of errors that reference NuGet packages, use the procedures in [NuGet package restore](https://docs.microsoft.com/nuget/consume-packages/package-restore) to restore the packages.

If the program runs and the output is similar to the following (has 8 rounds of successful teleportation with varying values True/False sent each round), your Q# environment is ready to support Q# development.

  ```
          Round 0:        Sent True,      got True.
          Teleportation successful!!
          Round 1:        Sent False,     got False.
          Teleportation successful!!
          ...
          Round 6:        Sent True,      got True.
          Teleportation successful!!
          Round 7:        Sent False,     got False.
          Teleportation successful!!
  ```

In addition to these libraries and samples, the Quantum Development Kit is provided along with further libraries for non-commercial use.
These libraries may be found in the [Microsoft/Quantum-NC](https://github.com/microsoft/quantum-nc) repository on GitHub.
